[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hello, welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
We're coming to you live
here from Boulder, Colorado,
at the Gaiam Studios
in Boulder, Colorado.
And since this is a
live, interactive show,
I encourage you to
communicate with us
and connect with us through
Facebook and Twitter.
We'll be going to you
throughout the show.
And it's great to
have you here with us.
So there have been some
very recent discoveries
in science and
compelling evidence found
about our Earth's
history that gives us
reasons to really
think differently
about ourselves and about
the origin of our species.
So, joining me today is New
York Time best-selling author,
Gregg Braden.
He is recognized as
a pioneer in bridging
science and spirituality.
And today, Gregg's
going to bring
his knowledge of being
a computer geologist
and also the first
technical operations
manager at Cisco Systems.
And he's here to help us
understand this critical time
in history.
He's the author of the book
called Deep Truth: Igniting
the Memory of Our Origin,
History, Destiny, and Fate.
Hello and welcome.
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello, Lisa.
It's so good to be here.
And I am so happy to
be with all of you,
our viewers all over
the world tonight.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: Thank you for
the opportunity to share.
There's so much to talk about.
>>LISA: There's a lot, yes.
>>BRADEN: My sense
is our time together
is going to go by very quickly.
>>LISA: Well, it's
going to be great.
This is going to be an
amazing amount of information
and education for you
so stay with us here.
So tell me a little bit
about the book Deep Truth.
Now what does the title mean?
>>BRADEN: Well,
the book itself--
I wrote this book in response
to our time in history.
I think if you're watching
this, it's no secret to you
that this is no ordinary time
in the history of our country,
in the history of
our civilization,
in the history of our world.
It's not our imagination.
The best minds of our
time are telling us
that we are facing the greatest
number, Lisa, the greatest
number and the
greatest magnitude
of crises ever to face
a single generation all
funneled into this little window
of time at the end of the 20th
and now the 21st century.
The book, Deep
Truth, the title--
where this title comes
from, it's actually
a quote from one of the great
physicists of the 20th century,
Niels Bohr.
He was having a conversation
with Albert Einstein.
They were talking about truth--
>>LISA: I sure would have
loved to be a fly on that wall.
>>BRADEN: Oh, absolutely.
And in this case, it was the
nature of scientific truth.
And what Niels
Bohr said is this,
he said it is the hallmark of
any deep truth-- in this case,
a scientific truth-- that its
negation is also a deep truth.
Now, what that means is that
the scientific foundation
upon which we base
many of our beliefs
about who we are, our
relationship to ourselves,
to our bodies, to one another,
and to the world-- it's
based upon a foundation
of scientific beliefs--
new discoveries are now
overturning those beliefs.
That's the good news.
The flip side of
this is there is
a reluctance and, in some
cases, an outright resistance
for the mainstream media,
mainstream academia,
classrooms, textbooks to
share the new discoveries.
This would be
important at any time.
But it's especially
critical right now
because we are at this moment of
crisis in our time in history.
>>LISA: Absolutely, and
it's to no fault of theirs.
Because these are
such new discoveries.
And the whole idea of
doing a show like this
is to get it into
the minds of people.
Because this is going
to shatter beliefs.
This is going to shatter
systems that we were taught
in school about
history and evolution.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely, Lisa.
And I want to be very
clear that this is not
the teacher's fault.
There's a story, there's
a scientific story
that has developed
and been embraced
for over a century
and a half about who
we are and our
relationship to the world.
And it takes time to
change that story.
We know that.
What the experts
are telling us is
we don't have decades
to change the way
we think of ourselves
so that we can
solve the crises of our time.
And that's why I think this
program is so important today.
So what I've done
for our viewers,
I've put together
a few images that
will kind of highlight
this conversation
and share some of
the discoveries
and some of the rare images
from ancient civilizations
and things as we go
through our conversation.
Are you OK--
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>BRADEN: --if we use these to--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: --take us
through where we are.
If you're looking at
your screen right now--
>>LISA: This is, by the way,
a very, very special treat.
Because a lot of these
images-- Gregg owns them.
And we're seeing them
for the first time here.
So this is--
>>BRADEN: Some of them.
>>LISA: --good stuff.
>>BRADEN: So then, if you're
looking at your screen
right now, what
you're seeing, this
is a special edition of
"Scientific American."
It was released in
September of 2005.
And if you think back, we were
living a very different world
from 2005 and where
we are right now.
>>LISA: Not so long ago.
>>BRADEN: But this was some of
the leading minds of our time.
Scientists, engineers, social
architects, political leaders,
spiritual leaders, religious
leaders, philosophers,
they all came together.
And they were asked, what makes
our time in history so unique?
What's different now about
any other time in history?
And the answers,
Lisa, were so profound
that "Scientific American"
released a special edition
to bring the rest
of the world up
to speed with what the experts
were telling us was happening.
They're saying, we're
at this critical time,
this critical time in
the history of our world
where the way that we
have lived is changing.
And to address the crises
that are being created,
we've got to think
differently than we have ever
thought of ourselves before.
And we've got to change the
thinking very, very quickly.
>>LISA: And why
this is important
is because, at this
particular time,
we hear all this information,
mixed information,
about global warming and then
there's the economic meltdown
and there's our entire
corporate crisis.
There's so much going on that's
affecting each individual
on an individual basis, in their
family's home life, whatever.
>>BRADEN: Well, it is.
And this is what they
were telling us about.
They talked about how we
deal with climate change,
our inability to grow food to
feed the seven plus billion
people on the planet right
now, the disappearing
of vital resources
like fresh water
and food, the collapse,
the inevitable collapse,
of the global economy.
2005, they knew it was coming
because the systems that
were in place at that time
were unsustainable systems.
And this is what we're seeing.
When we look at the
world and the things that
are changing, for
many people it looks
like everything's coming
apart at the seams.
If we look closely, what we see
is the only things coming apart
are the unsustainable
ways of living
based on unsustainable
ways of thinking.
And the new discoveries,
now, are telling us
where we can shift and
giving us very good reasons
to make those changes.
>>LISA: Well, in fact,
this is really no surprise.
And as you have
learned and you're
going to tell us
about today, that this
is a repeated cycle in history.
>>BRADEN: It is.
And I was trained as
a scientist, Lisa,
and I think science is good.
Science doesn't have
all the answers.
But my scientific mind was
asking the question, why now?
Why would all these changes
be happening right now?
And what we're
beginning understand
is that many of the
changes are actually
triggered by Earth's
location in space.
It's things like the
tilt and the wobble
and the angle and the orbit.
Earth is a very dynamic
body in the heavens.
It doesn't just rotate
to create night and day
and tilt for the seasons.
There's a lot more
going on, but some
of the cycles that
define these things cover
such vast periods of
time, no one in our time
remembers the last
time that it happened.
And this where-- this is where
our ancient and indigenous
traditions are so valuable.
Because they have
carried, perpetuated
the story of these changes.
So our own science
now is, in fact,
telling us that
changes are upon us.
Interestingly,
they parallel many
of the traditions of our most
cherished ancient indigenous
traditions.
>>LISA: Which we'd
love to learn about.
>>BRADEN: Well,
some of those-- I
think we've all heard of
native traditions that
talk about changes.
And many of those are
from native cultures
that are close to the earth.
So they talk about
when a white buffalo
is born in the plains
of North America,
or when the crops no longer
grow in their season.
And for a scientist,
that's not very scientific.
But we like the Maya
a lot because the Maya
thought a lot the way we think.
The Maya talked
about cycles of time
based in astronomical
events and celestial cycles
that we can confirm on
our computers today.
So they are talking a
language of mathematics
that we understand.
And what the Maya told us-- if
you're looking at your screen
right now, the Maya told
us about cycles of time.
Many people believe that
the image on the screen
is the Mayan calendar.
And it is not.
I want to be very
clear about that.
This is the Aztec calendar
that is based on Mayan ideas.
But there is no
single artifact that
represents all
the different ways
that the Maya were
able to track time.
But what we're seeing
on the Aztec calendar--
the four boxes that you see
highlighted in your screen
represent four cycles
of time in the past
that parallel the cycles
that we're having now.
What they said is
every 5,125 years
we go through a big change.
It is called a great world age.
And that we are nearing the
end of a great world age.
It's not the end of the world.
It's the end of a world age.
>>LISA: How did they know that?
>>BRADEN: How did they know
without computers, GPS,
and satellite?
So that's one of
the great mysteries.
>>LISA: And archeological digs.
>>BRADEN: We could do a
whole program on that.
>>LISA: Right.
It's amazing.
>>BRADEN: And there's
some very good theories
that we're going to talk about
as we go through our program.
The fact is they did
understand cycles in their time
that we're only beginning
to understand in ours.
And they told us in the language
of their time, a language
that's only now
beginning to make sense.
[CLEARS THROAT] Excuse me.
So they told us about
four cycles in the past,
5,125 years long.
And they told us that we are
living the fifth and final
in a series of five
of these cycles.
We're living this
cycle right now.
And that this cycle would
end in our lifetime.
That this cycle began with
a rare astronomical event,
August 11, 3114 BC.
This is the biblical era.
Interestingly, it's when so
many of our spiritual traditions
were created to help people
deal with the changes--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BRADEN: --in their
lives then, very
similar to what we're
living right now.
>>LISA: So religion
in those types
of contexts happened because
of the confusion that
was happening at that time.
>>BRADEN: At least, they
happened at the same time.
What we can say is
in response to what
was happening-- so the cycle
began August 11, 3114 BC.
They told us that this cycle
would end precisely 1,872,000
days later-- that is
5,125 years later--
with another rare astronomical
event that occurs on the winter
solstice, December
21 of the year 2012.
>>LISA: 2012, yeah.
>>BRADEN: So this is where
this date comes from.
It's not a date that
just is made up or comes,
you know, we just
pulled out of the air--
>>LISA: From movies, yeah.
>>BRADEN: It is linked
directly to astronomical cycles
that we can confirm today.
And what they told us-- and
this is very, very important--
they didn't say it's
the end of the world.
They said that it's
the end of a world age
and that anything that
was not sustainable,
that our way of
life would change.
They didn't say that
the world would end.
And there's no scientific
evidence, in fact,
to support the theories
that the world is ending
and many people are
putting forward.
>>LISA: Right.
And what I love
about this is this
is evidence that has existed for
hundreds and hundreds of years.
And just because--
it's so interesting
that this time in history
has been predicted.
>>BRADEN: It's been predicted,
prophesized, feared, embraced,
depending on your perspective.
But the key is, in
our culture, we've
been taught to think in
a linear perspective, led
to believe that we live-- that
our civilization is linear.
It happened once in the
primitive civilization,
and now here we are at the
pinnacle of the sophistication
that we have today and--
>>LISA: Well, because
science is relatively young.
>>BRADEN: It is
relatively young.
Science is only
about 300 years old.
>>LISA: That is young
in this overall-
>>BRADEN: Science is good.
Like I say, I was
trained as a scientist.
But we know that science
doesn't have all the answers.
Science can only be as useful to
us as we allow it to be honest.
And to keep science
honest, we must
allow the scientific
story of our lives
and our world to be updated
with new discoveries
when they are
proven to be facts.
And this is where we're
running into problems today.
There's a scientific story
that is about 150 years old,
about us, where we come from,
our relationship to the Earth,
our relationship to our
bodies, our relationship
to civilization.
And that story, as we're going
to see in just a few minutes,
is based on a number
of false assumptions.
Now that new discoveries
are overturning
those false assumptions,
it gives us good reasons
to think differently.
But somehow our ancestors knew
that these cycles were coming.
Our own science now is
beginning to confirm these.
And one of the places--
I wanted our viewers
to see this-- the ice
caps of our planet
are virtual libraries of
the history of our world.
>>LISA: Mmm, amazing.
>>BRADEN: Every year,
a new layer of ice
is deposited that has a
record of the climate,
the dust, the pollen,
little bubbles
of carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere.
>>LISA: For thousands of years.
>>BRADEN: Well, in
1999, the scientist
of the earth got
together and drilled
through the thickest
part of the ice
to preserve the
record that's there.
Because the ice is melting.
They wanted to preserve as much
as they could before it melts.
And to their amazement--
now, each layer
represents one year of
the history of the Earth.
And even the scientists,
I think were amazed.
Because when these
cores came up,
Lisa, 450,000 layers of ice.
>>LISA: 450,000 layers, years.
>>BRADEN: Each
layer is one year.
450,000--
>>LISA: Years.
>>BRADEN: --years of the
history of the Earth.
Suddenly, we have--
>>LISA: --of evidence.
>>BRADEN: --to compare to where
we are right now, to find out,
is Earth broken?
Have we broken it?
Are we living an
anomalous cycle?
And the answers to that are
driving many or the discoveries
that we're talking about today.
So if our viewers have
never seen ice cores,
I want you to see what
an ice core looks like.
It's on your screen right now.
>>LISA: This is fascinating.
>>BRADEN: Yes, go ahead.
>>LISA: And this was
discovered in 1999.
It's amazing that it hasn't
hit mass mainstream media.
I mean, look at all of the
history that's right there.
>>BRADEN: Well, from
these ice cores,
we can tell a lot about
the history of the Earth.
We can talk about temperature,
about ancient sea levels,
the strength of the sun
reaching the earth--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BRADEN: --the magnetic field
of the Earth, all those things.
So what I'd like for
our viewers to see,
there's a screen-- an image
on your screen right now.
To the left is present day.
To the right is
450,000 years ago.
All I'd like for
you to see from this
is that there are obvious
cycles that are happening.
And we can definitely
see these cycles.
And the cycles are about
100,000 years a piece.
The graph on top
is one ice core.
The one in the middle, the
green, is a second ice core.
You can see they
parallel one another.
The one on the bottom is
the thickness of the ice.
>>LISA: We want to come back.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back,
we're going to talk
about the significance
of all of this,
what these cycles represent.
As you can see, on the
graph, that there are cycles.
If you know patterns
at all, you see
that there are cycles
that are happening.
Gregg is going to take us
through what those cycles mean,
why this is relevant in
this conversation today,
and what it means to us--
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --in our everyday life.
And then, the best
thing about it
is what we can do to affect it.
We'll be right back.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
My host is-- or, my
guest is Gregg Braden.
>>BRADEN: Thank you.
>>LISA: We'll be right back
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Hi, welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Welcome to "Gaiam
Inspirations" here on Gaiam TV.
My guest is Gregg Braden.
And we're talking about
his book Deep Truth.
And what we've been talking
about before the break,
the cycles that have been
predicted, that we're
going through right now,
and some of the reasons
why we're experiencing
some of the global crises
we're experiencing right now.
So--
>>BRADEN: Sure.
Well, just before
the break what we saw
was that, from the ice
cores in Antarctica--
and this is a very, very high
level we're looking at these--
but the data shows us that
there are definite cycles
and that we are precisely
where we would expect
to be at the time in the
cycle that we're living now.
That the parameters
that are changing,
the amount of sunlight reaching
the Earth, the climate change,
the temporary warming,
the melting of the ice,
this is precisely
what we would expect
to see at this
point in the cycle.
It doesn't last forever.
And then, it goes into the
next portion of the cycle.
So what this says
to me is that I'm
less concerned about the
physical changes in our world
today.
Our ancestors
lived through them.
They wrote to us.
They told us in the
language of their time
what we would need to do to
work through these cycles.
Now, our own
science is beginning
to confirm what our
ancestors told us.
And it's all about our
relationship to cooperation
and competition and the
way deal with problems,
the way we solve problems
in our lives today.
>>LISA: This is
very, very important.
Because we are-- this
cycle has been predicted.
It is-- We're in the
right time in the cycle
if you know enough about
what we're talking about.
>>BRADEN: Sure.
>>LISA: And that's why
this is so important.
And what we can really
do to affect it.
>>BRADEN: Well, it is actually--
rather than viewing the Earth
as being broken, it's actually
a rare, precious, pivotal moment
and opportunity to
change the things
in the past that no longer work.
It's a reality check, Lisa.
>>LISA: Yes, we're
seeing that everywhere.
>>BRADEN: The things
we've done that no longer
work, let's stop doing them.
And the things that we've
done that work well, let's
do a lot of them.
Are there systems broken?
Yes.
And there are a lot of
beautiful things happening
in the world and a very,
very beautiful opportunity
to embrace and bring
those new systems forward,
in terms of the
healing of our bodies,
our relationship to our food,
the way we live our lives.
>>LISA: And with our families
and our work and everything.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: So what did
it all stem from?
>>BRADEN: Well, when I
wrote the book Deep Truth,
one of the questions
that I wanted
to answer for
myself is why do we
think about ourselves
the way we do?
And how do we
solve these crises?
And what became very
apparent is that the way
that we answer a single
question determines
how we solve our crises.
And the question is
simply this, who are we?
>>LISA: Mmm, yes.
>>BRADEN: Or who am I? --when
we think about ourselves.
That seemingly innocent,
very benign little question
is actually the
filter through which
we will create all
of the decisions
and all of the
choices to address
every personal or
collective crisis.
Who are we?
And where does that
idea come from?
>>LISA: And where are we
going into the future?
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --personally, as well.
What are our goals?
What are our dreams?
Yes.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
And it's all based, however, on
the way we think of ourselves.
And rarely do we have the
opportunity to really, really
embrace that and
think about that.
Well, when we do think
about that, what we find
is that much of our
lives and our world today
is based on scientific
assumptions, some
of them 150 years old.
There are many of them.
I've identified
five in the book.
I'd like to share them with
our viewers right now, quickly.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BRADEN: And then, zero
in on the one that's
having, I believe, the
greatest impact today.
>>LISA: So think
about these as things
that shape our societies,
that shape our belief
systems, really.
>>BRADEN: So if you're looking
at your screen right now,
what you're seeing--
when you were in school,
Lisa, when I was in school,
young people in school today,
we're being taught these
assumptions as facts.
And we're going to see
that they are not facts,
as a matter of fact.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BRADEN: The first
one is that evolution
explains life in general.
It explains human life.
The second assumption is
that civilization itself,
it's about 5,000
or 5,500 years old,
that it's happened one time
and it's essentially linear--
>>LISA: That that's it, OK.
>>BRADEN: --from primitive
to sophisticated.
Number three is that
consciousness is somehow
separate from our
physical world.
Number four is related, that the
space between physical things
is empty.
And number five is a Darwinian,
another Darwinian assumption,
that nature is based
on what he called
"survival of the strongest."
It later became
survival of the fittest.
>>LISA: And that has
become a big buzz word.
>>BRADEN: And his own words.
All of these are taught
in our schools today.
All of them are
absolutely false.
They've been proven
scientifically
in peer reviewed,
technical journals.
These are false.
The evolution explains
life, not human life.
And in longer programs, we can
get into that in more detail.
>>LISA: Right
>>BRADEN: But what I'd like
to do right now, if you're
taking notes, write
false above all these.
Put a circle and a big
line right through that.
And let's zero in
on the one that's
having the greatest impact--
>>LISA: Kids at home,
tell your teachers, false.
>>BRADEN: --on our lives today.
If you wonder, if
you're saying, well why
are these things important?
These are assumptions that
we now know are false.
And if you want to know
what the consequences
of these false
assumptions are, we
need look no further
than the world around us,
how we deal with climate
change and the failing
economic system, how we deal
with the food and the water
shortages and
disease, how we deal
with the crises of our time.
Now, when we look at these
false assumptions, the idea
that nature is based upon
survival of the strongest,
this I think is so
deeply entrenched, Lisa--
>>LISA: It is.
>>BRADEN: --in ways that either
consciously or unconsciously,
you may not even be aware of.
I'd like for our viewers to
know where this came from.
So I'm pulling this right
out of Darwin's book.
This is from his book On
the Origin of Species,
published in 1859.
What Darwin said, he looked
in the world around him.
And when he saw examples in
nature of certain insects
or animals and the way
they behaved there,
he extrapolated
that and said, that
must be the law for all nature
everywhere, including humans.
So I'm going to share his quote.
This is a direct quote.
He begins by telling
us it may not
be logical, what
he's about to say.
So this is what he says, "It
may not be a logical deduction,
but to my imagination it is
far more satisfactory to look
at instincts, such as" birds
that the other birds out
of the nest because
they're different--
>>LISA: So he was hypothesizing.
>>BRADEN: He was-- or
ants making slaves out
of other ants.
Because they can do that.
Because they're
bigger and stronger.
He said that it
makes sense to him
to see those as small examples
of a general rule, a law that
applies to all life.
And here's his law.
He said, "The law is multiply,
vary, let the strongest live,
and the weakest die."
Let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
This is such a dangerous
way of thinking.
Our corporations
today that are failing
are based upon this concept.
Our global economic system
is based upon this concept.
The way that we share
the diminishing resources
on our planet as we go
through the cyclic shifts
that we've just identified
in the last segment
are based on this
way of thinking.
Our young people
in school are being
taught that it's more important
to be right and succeed than it
is to develop the
excellence of--
>>LISA: Their personal
excellence, yes.
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
This idea, survival
of the strongest,
if we want to know the
consequences of this thinking,
we need look no further
than the 20th century.
Some of the greatest atrocities
of human against human
and the greatest
human suffering were
justified in this
way of thinking.
And many of the crises that
we identified earlier--
>>LISA: The famine--
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --the
disease, everything.
>>BRADEN: They're all the
result of this way of thinking.
Now, the flip side-- and I
want to get to the good news.
The good news is that new
discoveries are telling us
that nature is not based upon
survival of the strongest.
Over 400 peer-reviewed studies
were conduct in the late '90s,
in the early 2000s,
asking a single question:
what is the optimum amount of
competition in any environment?
The classroom?
The workplace?
The playing field?
And this is violent competition.
This isn't a friendly
game of chess.
>>LISA: All right.
>>BRADEN: And all 400 studies
came back with exactly the same
answer--
>>LISA: When was this?
>>BRADEN: --the answer
was zero competition.
This was in the late
'90s, early 2000s.
Alfie Kohn, in his
book, No Contest:
The Case Against
Competition, really,
really brought this to light.
Now I just want to share
a quote. "The ideal amount
of competition," he said,
"in any environment,
the classroom, the workplace,
the family, the playing field,
is none.
Competition always, always,
always is destructive."
That is followed by
another discovery
in the very prestigious
journal "New Scientist."
I'm speaking quickly
because I want this
all in before the break.
>>LISA: Well, this
is very important.
>>BRADEN: "New Scientist,"
this is April, 2008.
This is a direct quote
from Michael Le Page.
What he says is, "What
we see in the wild is not
every animal for itself.
Cooperation," he said, "is an
incredibly successful survival
strategy."
He goes on to say that when
cooperation breaks down,
the results can be disastrous.
And just to give our listeners
and our viewers an idea,
if you want to see a beautiful
example of cooperation,
you need look no further
than the body that
houses the soul that is
seeing this broadcast.
Because your one body
is actually a community,
as my dear friend and colleague
Dr. Bruce Lipton reminds us,
50 trillion cells that must
cooperate and work together
to give us the
bodies that function
so that we can be
in this world--
>>LISA: Yes, and--
>>BRADEN: --if that breaks
down, that is disastrous.
And that's only one example.
>>LISA: If that breaks down,
that's what disease is.
And the body is constantly
achieving its highest state.
It's constantly
repairing, constantly
trying to regain
that optimal state.
>>BRADEN: Well, it is.
And this would be important
at any time, Lisa.
But now, within the
context of where we are,
we are the generation
living the close
of a 5,125 year long cycle
and the birth of the next
that happens to coincide
with some of the greatest
physical changes on this
planet, wreaking havoc
upon unsustainable ways of life.
We've got to think differently.
If we attempt to solve those
crises through the old ways
of thinking that
led to the crises,
we know where that's
going to lead.
>>LISA: So it's happening
with disease and the increase
in disease.
It's happening--
>>BRADEN: When we think
about our bodies, sure.
>>LISA: --with the
economic system.
It's happening
everywhere around us.
It's happening everywhere.
>>BRADEN: This idea of
survival of the strongest
and that competition,
violent competition, is good,
it's so deeply entrenched
into our psyche,
consciously and in many
cases unconsciously,
and it has been since 1859,
since Darwin introduced this.
Now, it's about to take
on a new dimension.
Can I go to the next level?
>>LISA: That's why you're here.
Yes, please.
>>BRADEN: All right.
I want to talk about
civilization and, then,
the role of competition
in civilization.
When I was in school,
you were in school,
our young people in school
today are being shown a graph,
a shot very similar to what
you're seeing on the screen
right now.
If you look to your
screen, you see
that civilization,
we're being told,
began around 5,000, 5,500
years ago, ancient Sumeria.
And then, Egypt came
later and the Indus valley
and India and Greece and Rome.
>>LISA: I remember
this from school
>>BRADEN: This is the history
of the whole world forever.
Now, the problem
is new discoveries
have overturned this.
But they're not being shared in
the media and in the classroom.
And I've had the
opportunity personally
to explore some of these sites.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BRADEN: These
are peer-reviewed,
scientifically accepted.
These isn't a
hypothesis or a theory
about Atlantis or Lemuria.
These are sites that are
scientifically documented
to be much older.
So I'm going to
give two examples.
One, I personally have explored.
This is northern Peru.
This site now is older than
any other advanced civilization
in all of the Americas.
Older than the Maya, than
the Aztec, than the Inca,
than the Olmec.
This is an area that
is called Caral, Peru.
Five pyramids, two massive,
massive central plazas
like the one you're seeing
on your screen right now--
>>LISA: Those have
all been discovered?
Wow.
>>BRADEN: This is an
ongoing archaeological site.
>>LISA: --archaeological--
>>BRADEN: It's an
active site right now.
I was there the day that
the labs returned the dates
for the dating for this,
the independent labs.
The bottom line is that
this site collapsed
when we're told that
civilization began.
This site is dated between
5,000 and 7,000 years--
>>LISA: So it existed--
>>BRADEN: --is an
advanced civilization.
When we're told that
civilization began--
>>LISA: --began here--
>>BRADEN: This is just--
this is one example.
Let's cut to the chase.
The oldest civilization now
scientifically documented
anywhere in the
world right now is
a site that's
called Gobekli Tepe.
It's in Turkey.
>>LISA: And you
went there for us.
Wow.
>>BRADEN: This is
an amazing site.
It's an active site.
Only four of the temples
have been excavated.
15 to 20 are still underground.
And they can see through
earth-imaging radar,
is how they know
that they're there.
>>LISA: So there's
civilizations underneath earth,
underneath earth
under-- there's--
>>BRADEN: --layers upon
layers upon layers.
>>LISA: Layers and layers.
11,000 years--
>>BRADEN: But we haven't
gotten to that part.
You're giving it away.
>>LISA: Oh my god.
>>BRADEN: So this
site right here,
this site was intentionally
buried 8,000 years ago
for some mysterious
reason, which
means that everything
is very well preserved.
So you can see the
images on your screen.
Look at the glyphs that
are shown on these stones.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>BRADEN: 8,000 years
ago, but it's older.
Right now, the
site is being dated
between 11,300 and
11,500 years ago.
Twice as old as what we're
being told that civilization
has been in the past.
If we go back to
our graph of history
and we plug-in
these dates, there's
a new story that develops.
>>LISA: But why isn't
this more talked about?
Why isn't this discovery--
>>BRADEN: You
know, Lisa, I think
it takes time for
new discoveries
to trickle down into mainstream.
There's a lot of money involved.
For 150 years there's a
scientific story of us,
our relationship to
the Earth, and our past
that's been taught.
It takes time to change that.
Entire careers are based
upon teaching that story.
>>LISA: 5,000 year old--
>>BRADEN: Each state
in the United States
has to approve its
own curricula for what
is taught in the schools.
>>LISA: But if we're
saying-- if you're
saying that the
cycles are every 5,125
years and that those cycles
have existed way before us,
of course that 5,000 year
old civilization doesn't
make any sense whatsoever.
>>BRADEN: Well, if we go
back and plug in the new
dates into-- and other
dates we haven't even
talked about-- Egypt, the Giza
Plateau, other sites in India
and places like
that-- what we find
is that civilization
reaches back much further.
But here's where it
gets interesting.
On your screen, if you're
seeing right now on your screen,
the blue area marks the
end of the last ice age,
about 12,000 years ago.
After that, 4,000
years, there was
a lot of rain, big
storms, climate change.
And when we put in the lines
that delineate the 5,000 year
cycles-- the dark lines you're
seeing on your screen now-- all
of a sudden, Lisa--
[CLEARS THROAT]
Excuse me. --what we find is
the 5,000 years that we've
been taught are the history
of the world forever
are only the most recent cycle.
And the new discoveries are
now telling us about the cycle
before this right at the
end of the last ice age.
>>LISA: Ah, I see.
>>BRADEN: Here's why
that's important.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BRADEN: It means they
lived, in their time,
through very similar
conditions to what we're
living through now.
We can learn from our past.
We can learn what
they did to help
them get through the changes.
And it's all based in
this idea of cooperation
versus competition.
>>LISA: That is the main point.
>>BRADEN: The last piece of
this, it's so fascinating.
>>LISA: OK, wow.
>>BRADEN: Archaeologists have
found that large scale war does
not appear anywhere before
the 5,000 year cycle
that we're in right now.
When we go back into
these older civilizations,
they're advanced.
They're huge.
There's no evidence
of any weapons.
No evidence of any
protection around the cities,
no walls, no moats, no mass
graves, no mutilated bodies.
It's possible they
haven't been found yet.
But so many of these sites
have been excavated now, you
would think you would
see some somewhere.
Archaeologists and
anthropologists
are beginning to
suspect that war
is a habit that was developed
in our cycle early on.
And if that's the
case, we can unlearn it
as we go into the next.
And what we're going
to do in this hour
is going to be a key in helping
us to move toward implementing
tipping the scales of peace
and balance in our favor.
>>LISA: See, now
that's fascinating.
Because it explains
that we didn't live
in this world of war prior
to this, as a society.
It's interesting, because
one of our Facebook listeners
is saying, he wants to be
at the top of his class.
And he wants to still get his
graduate degree and so forth.
So he's in that place of wanting
to move up, up, up but yet
doesn't want to
be in competition
and excluding others,
which is a great point.
Yeah?
>>BRADEN: OK, so what
he's actually saying,
it's not about excluding others.
It's about becoming
all that he can be.
It's about his own excellence.
>>LISA: Mmm.
>>BRADEN: If we stay
to the positive,
you don't tear down what is.
You show the possibilities
of what has been discovered.
And then, once the
facts are clear,
I think the choices
become obvious.
Once the facts are
clear-- teachers
from all over the
world are coming to me
and they're saying, "How can
we teach this in our classrooms
now?"
>>LISA: Right.
>>BRADEN: This is
peer-reviewed science.
So it should be accepted.
This is where we go back
to this idea of science
is only as good as we
allow it to be honest.
And to be honest,
science must be
updated with new discoveries
that are, in fact,
peer-reviewed and accepted--
not just any hypothesis,
but peer-reviewed science.
This is based on facts.
We're just barely
skimming the surface
in this brief time that
we have together here.
But you get the idea,
certainly, of where we're going.
I was taught that war is as
natural as night and day--
>>LISA: Wow.
Right.
>>BRADEN: --that war
is something humans
have always done.
>>LISA: It's always
existed, yes, right.
>>BRADEN: And what the new
studies now are showing
is that, while it has existed
in this 5,000 year cycle,
that it may not be
our truest nature.
And if it is, in fact, a
habit that has been learned,
then it's a habit
that can be unlearned.
I believe that war
will become obsolete
in our lifetimes, Lisa.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>BRADEN: And I'm encouraged
by what I'm seeing.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: I think this
is the generation where
we turn our backs and
we walk away from war
as a way to solve our problems.
Because it is obsolete.
It no longer serves the
purpose it has in the past.
>>LISA: That is the
main point here.
That is the main point.
We're going to talk about how
to get to that place of cohesion
and how to get to that
place of coherence.
When we come back,
we're going to continue
to take your questions
and comments from Facebook
and Twitter.
We'll be right.
This is Lisa Garr.
My guest, Gregg Braden.
>>BRADEN: Thank you.
>>LISA: You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
My guest is Gregg Braden.
And we're talking
about the deep truths.
In the past segment,
we just talked
about debunking some of the
false assumptions, specifically
the Darwinian theory of
survival of the strongest.
And we talked about the
importance of coherence--
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
>>LISA: --about the importance
of communication and about some
of the solutions around
living in a time of war
and, especially, what we're
going through right now.
Which is reported-- mostly
what we see that's reported on
is about struggle
and about crises
and the economic meltdown.
And we hear so much about this.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: We're offering,
today, a solution to some
of that, an opportunity to get
to another place right now.
This is an oasis,
this conversation.
>>BRADEN: Well, it is.
And it's not our imagination.
This is a unique time.
The Harvard biologist EO
Wilson was very clear.
He said we're entering what he
called a bottleneck in time.
I love the visual from that.
He said when our
resources and our ability
to solve our problems,
we push to the limits--
and he said that in 2005.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BRADEN: I can't
help but think we're
very near if not at
those limits right now.
So we are being asked to think
very differently than we've
ever thought before.
And the consequences of
not thinking differently
are the collapse of the
systems in the world around us.
If we want to know where
false assumptions have led,
we just look at the
world that we're
having problems with right now.
>>LISA: We look
at the news, yes.
>>BRADEN: So the images that
we're looking at right now
on our computer, I
think everyone knows
that we are
influenced by fields,
the magnetic fields
of the Earth,
the solar fields of the Earth.
It's very well
documented in science.
We know that we're
influenced by those fields.
But if there's any
doubt, I've got
something I want to show you.
If you look on your screen right
now, between 1750 and 1920--
what you're seeing on
your screen in the red,
these are showing the
ebb-- this image is showing
the ebb and the flow of solar
cycles on the sun and the way
that they are ebbing and flowing
over this period of time.
The next image you
see, in the blue,
is the ebb and flow
of human activity
during that time, measured
by cycles of war and peace,
innovation, new discoveries,
new innovations in science
and technology.
>>LISA: So we're very
affected by our environment.
>>BRADEN: So obviously,
there's a correlation.
We could spend a lot of
time looking at this.
But there's obviously
a correlation.
We're influenced by the cycles.
Why is that important now?
Here's why, because of where
we are in the solar cycles.
If you look on your
screen right now,
solar cycle 22,
at the very peak,
where we were influenced
by this influx of energy
is where Gulf War
one actually began,
when Iraq invaded Kuwait.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BRADEN: This is
when it happened.
Solar cycle 23 right in the
middle was September 11, 2001.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>BRADEN: So obviously a
lot of chaos coming around.
It doesn't mean it
must happen that way.
But look at this.
The very beginning
of solar cycle 24
began in January
of this year 2011.
And as soon as that
cycle kicked in,
what was called the Arab Spring
began with new innovation
happening on a
large scale socially
in parts of the world
that haven't actually
had this in the past.
So what it says is that
we are on the leading
edge of an influx,
powerful influx, of energy.
It's not good or bad.
>>LISA: It's not?
OK.
>>BRADEN: It's how
we apply that energy.
We can take the energy of
this new solar cycle and we
can use that to bump up--
>>LISA: But the past
has not been so great.
>>BRADEN: Because we
weren't, maybe, aware
of the possibilities and
how it could be used.
>>LISA: And do we know how
long it's going to last?
>>BRADEN: They last--
they're 11 years cycles,
is what we're talking about.
>>LISA: I see.
>>BRADEN: So we know that
the fields influence us.
And these kinds of
images tell us that.
Now, the new discoveries
are that it's
a two-way conversation.
We influence the field.
We communicate with the field.
September 11 helped us to
understand that as well.
If you're looking on your
screen, what you're seeing
is the data from two
satellites telling us
about the strength of
Earth's magnetic field.
Each 24 hour day-- you see
the ebb and the flow-- one
satellite's red.
One satellite's blue.
There's a big spike.
That spike is
September 11, 2001.
This is the spike that gave
the scientists the heads up.
It begins at 9:00 AM
Eastern Standard Time,
15 minutes after the first
plane hit the first tower.
Scientists believe it took
about 15 minutes for the images
to circulate the world
through the media.
And what we're
seeing on the graph
is the mass outpouring of human
emotion, heart-based emotion
in response to what
people were seeing.
>>LISA: That was measurable?
>>BRADEN: That was measurable.
This gave scientists
the heads up.
This gives new meaning
to the Gaia theory
that we are so deeply connected
to the fields of the Earth.
This gave scientists the
heads up that, my god,
we have the ability to
influence the very field
of the Earth that
connects and sustains
all life on this planet.
And we can do it through
heart-based emotion.
Now, this is in
response to a tragedy.
The question is, can
it happen because we
choose to create the experience?
And that's where we're going.
>>LISA: And how is it measured?
Well, let's talk about
this a little bit.
>>BRADEN: Well,
what scientists now
know is that this
field-- what's happening
is every moment of
every day there's
a conversation between
our heart and our brain.
The quality of that conversation
is called coherence.
Optimum coherence is measured
as an electrical signal 0.10
Hertz.
It's a very low frequency.
This is the low frequency
that whales communicate with,
actually.
It's a very, very low frequency.
>>LISA: Huh.
>>BRADEN: When we feel
the feeling in our heart
that creates this
optimum frequency,
we are in high coherence.
This is where we couple with
the fields of the Earth.
This is where we communicate
with the fields of the Earth--
>>LISA: At that level.
>>BRADEN: --with the
very organ in our body
that was designed to
communicate with these fields.
Our brain creates a
relatively weak electrical
and magnetic signal.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>BRADEN: But it's our
heart-- we were born, Lisa,
with the organ in our body
that creates the strongest
electrical and magnetic
field to communicate
with these fields of the Earth.
This is where healing
begins in our bodies.
And this is where we begin
to tip the scales of balance
and peace beyond our bodies.
Let me just share a story.
>>LISA: It makes sense,
because the heart's
an electrical system.
But yes, go ahead.
>>BRADEN: Well, it does.
--a very quick story.
2001, right after
9/11, I was in France.
[CLEARS THROAT] Excuse me.
I was with a large
group, 3,500 people.
An angry man in the
audience became disruptive.
The French security people
took him out of the room.
I asked them to hold
him just for a minute
while we led that group of 3,500
people in an exercise, very
simple exercise of
coherence for three minutes.
We brought the man back in.
And when he came in we give
the microphone and said,
explain, what is
your experience?
He looked at us and he
said, this is so strange.
He said, I can think
the reason I'm angry.
I cannot feel the anger.
He couldn't access
the emotion of anger
in the presence of
that coherent field.
What happened in that
room for that man
is possible for a planet.
>>LISA: So 3,500 people were
feeling from their heart space
and it healed this person.
And he didn't even know why.
>>BRADEN: He didn't know why.
He knew why he had been angry.
He didn't understand why
he couldn't feel the anger
and access it any longer.
That's possible for a planet.
It's very, very hard to
declare war on your neighbor
when you're not feeling that--
>>LISA: Of course.
>>BRADEN: --in your heart.
And when it comes to the
electrical-- I'm sorry,
the magnetic field of the
Earth, there is no them and us.
Every CEO of every
corporation, every leader
of every nation,
every blade of grass,
every hamster, every goldfish--
>>LISA: It's all the same.
>>BRADEN: Every human is all
connected through this field.
We have--
>>LISA: Every family,
yes, every relative.
>>BRADEN: We have the ability
to feed and nurture this field
and nourish the field
through our hearts
if we understand that language.
And it's all about
coherence, which
parallels our most cherished
and ancient spiritual
and indigenous traditions.
Isn't that interesting?
>>LISA: Which is what they knew
5,000 years ago-- 5,125 years
ago and we're getting back to
in order to bridge that gap.
>>BRADEN: Apparently, they did.
Well, this is led, now,
scientists to the hypothesis--
and specifically scientists of
the Institute of Heart Math who
will be future guests
on this program--
>>LISA: Yes, Howard Martin.
>>BRADEN: --pioneers
in researching
the power of the human heart
to do much more than pump blood
in our bodies.
This led to the hypothesis
that strong, collective emotion
can in fact impact the very
fields that connect all life.
That has led to-- the
first of its kind, Lisa,
this is the first of its
kind-- science-based initiative
designed specifically
to make use
of this connection between
us and the fields that
connect the Earth.
Personal coherence is good.
It's good for our bodies,
our immune system,
anti-aging hormones.
It extends beyond our bodies.
Global coherence is really
good, the Global Coherence
Initiative.
I'm going to share with our
listeners and with our viewers.
This is the mission
statement for this project.
The goal of this project is
"to unite millions of people
from varied beliefs and
cultures to shift consciousness
from instability and chaos
to balance and cooperation."
That is the purpose of this
first-of-its-kind science-based
initiative.
>>LISA: Not a lot of
companies with that mission.
>>BRADEN: Never has
anything like this
been attempted before.
>>LISA: So nice.
OK.
>>BRADEN: It's a
two-phase project.
The first phase is
building the sensors
to tell us about our
relationship to the Earth
and when we're
impacting these fields.
On your screen, I would
like you to see this.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>BRADEN: This is
a very technical
looking blueprint of
one of the sensors.
This is what it looks
like on the drawing board.
But when they're implemented,
look how beautiful
they are in the ground.
This is the first
sensor installed
in Boulder Creek, California.
>>LISA: And that's what measures
the human resonance field?
>>BRADEN: This is one sensor.
Now we have a network of
these sensors on your screen.
There's one in California, one
in New York, one in the UK,
one in Saudi Arabia, and one in
New Zealand that are presently
installed.
When the network
is completed, we
hope to have this
number that you're now
seeing on the screen,
an additional-- number
of additional sensors.
But what I'd like to
emphasize is the system
is up and running right now.
Every day, it's
sending back data
that helps us to understand
our relationship to the Earth.
And what I'd like to do--
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>BRADEN: --if we
have time today,
let's go through a little
exercise of coherence.
Do you want to do
that together here?
>>LISA: Definitely, yeah.
>>BRADEN: OK, so
what I'd like to do,
if you go to the site
GLcoherence.org--
and we'll bring
this up in a minute.
You could learn all about--
>>LISA: You can see
that here for right now.
We'll go to the
site in later on.
>>BRADEN: You can
learn all about that.
But one of the things that we
have the opportunity to do--
and I think it's on
your screen right now.
It's an image, a real-time
image of the Earth.
And everyone-- right
now there are 21 people
in different places on the
Earth who are logged on
to this global coherence site,
feeding, nurturing, nourishing
this field with coherence.
Each site could be
hundreds of people.
It could be a room with
Or it could be one person.
>>LISA: Right.
Nice.
>>BRADEN: So this creates this
sense of community and family
that we have.
It's very, very simple
to learn coherence.
So what I'd like for
you to do-- we've
done a lot of
left-brained stuff.
Let's just do this right now.
If you would please
uncross your legs.
>>LISA: OK.
I'm going to do an experience.
>>BRADEN: I'm going
to do the same.
>>LISA: OK.
>>BRADEN: The key is to move
our awareness from our mind
into our heart.
And the way our indigenous
ancestors taught us to do this
is to simply touch
our heart center.
That sensation automatically
draws our awareness
to the place where we
feel the sensation.
That's why we
uncrossed our legs.
>>LISA: OK, so--
>>BRADEN: So we move our
awareness into our heart.
And as we begin to focus
our awareness in our heart
to the best of our ability,
we feel the feelings
of care, appreciation,
gratitude, compassion.
And breathe as if
those emotions are
coming from our heart center.
And the music that
you're hearing now
will help you do
this a little bit.
Now just take a
couple of seconds,
just a little
experience of coherence.
>>LISA: Take a break, yes.
>>BRADEN: Take a deep breath.
To the best of your ability,
feel the feeling of gratitude,
appreciation, care,
and compassion.
And know that you are
joining your family,
our brothers and sisters--
>>LISA: --around the world--
>>BRADEN: --around the
world in real-time,
this very instant
this is happening.
We are nourishing
the very fields
that connect and
sustain all of us.
And just like it was hard
for that man in that room
to feel anger when he came
into the field of coherence,
this is the kind of nourishment
in the fields of the Earth that
will allow us to tip those
scales of peace, cooperation
in our favor as we solve
the economic problems
and the problems
of war and peace.
And you can do this
from your living room.
>>LISA: You can do this
at any moment of your day.
You can do this in the
middle of a chaotic day.
You could do this, maybe,
driving in your car.
But you'd have to
have your eyes open.
You can do it if you're in
the middle of an argument--
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --or you're
in a work environment
that you don't love.
It could be done to bring
yourself back to coherence,
to a grounded space.
And it's happening all over
the world, which is amazing.
>>BRADEN: It is happening
all over the world right now.
If you'll take one
more deep breath,
if you haven't opened
your eyes, if you'd
like to come back with
us-- I know that was fast.
I wanted to give you just a--
>>LISA: Experience.
>>BRADEN: --sense.
This is designed to be a
high-level program this evening
to inform and to share
these new discoveries.
>>LISA: Oh, I just want to tell
you, Facebook and Twitter fans,
let us know what that
experience was like for you, how
you could use that in your life.
I want to definitely
hear from you.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely, well,
as our time is ticking down,
I want to thank Lisa
for the opportunity
to create this
kind of programming
and Gaiam for making
this possible.
This beautiful
set, this bandwidth
that we're broadcasting
on, we couldn't do this
and we couldn't share it with
you if you didn't support Gaiam
and Gaiam hadn't
created this for us.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: So in this way, we
cooperate and work together.
And I think that's
very, very important.
>>LISA: And thank
you so much, Gregg,
because your
information is vast.
It's incredible.
You can see a full 90 minute
presentation with Gregg
on Gaiam TV.
And I also want to
thank you, the listener,
for participating in this.
Because it's your
energy that makes
this happen and
your feedback that
keeps this conversation going.
So thank you so, so much.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And if you
go to Gaiam TV,
it'll bring you all sorts of
cutting-edge, thought-provoking
interviews, and films,
and documentaries,
and all sorts of information.
You can sign up for your free
trial by going to Gaiam TV.
Thank you so much, Gregg.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: And thank you so much.
Join us next time on
"Gaiam Inspirations."
[MUSIC PLAYING]